.TH PCRE2-CONFIG 1 "28 September 2014" "PCRE2 10.00"
.SH NAME
pcre2-config - program to return PCRE2 configuration
.SH SYNOPSIS
.rs
.sp
.nf
.B pcre2-config  [--prefix] [--exec-prefix] [--version]
.B "             [--libs8] [--libs16] [--libs32] [--libs-posix]"
.B "             [--cflags] [--cflags-posix]"
.fi
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.rs
.sp
\fBpcre2-config\fP returns the configuration of the installed PCRE2 libraries
and the options required to compile a program to use them. Some of the options
apply only to the 8-bit, or 16-bit, or 32-bit libraries, respectively, and are
not available for libraries that have not been built. If an unavailable option
is encountered, the "usage" information is output.
.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.rs
.TP 10
\fB--prefix\fP
Writes the directory prefix used in the PCRE2 installation for architecture
independent files (\fI/usr\fP on many systems, \fI/usr/local\fP on some
systems) to the standard output.
.TP 10
\fB--exec-prefix\fP
Writes the directory prefix used in the PCRE2 installation for architecture
dependent files (normally the same as \fB--prefix\fP) to the standard output.
.TP 10
\fB--version\fP
Writes the version number of the installed PCRE2 libraries to the standard
output.
.TP 10
\fB--libs8\fP
Writes to the standard output the command line options required to link
with the 8-bit PCRE2 library (\fB-lpcre2-8\fP on many systems).
.TP 10
\fB--libs16\fP
Writes to the standard output the command line options required to link
with the 16-bit PCRE2 library (\fB-lpcre2-16\fP on many systems).
.TP 10
\fB--libs32\fP
Writes to the standard output the command line options required to link
with the 32-bit PCRE2 library (\fB-lpcre2-32\fP on many systems).
.TP 10
\fB--libs-posix\fP
Writes to the standard output the command line options required to link with
PCRE2's POSIX API wrapper library (\fB-lpcre2-posix\fP \fB-lpcre2-8\fP on many
systems).
.TP 10
\fB--cflags\fP
Writes to the standard output the command line options required to compile
files that use PCRE2 (this may include some \fB-I\fP options, but is blank on
many systems).
.TP 10
\fB--cflags-posix\fP
Writes to the standard output the command line options required to compile
files that use PCRE2's POSIX API wrapper library (this may include some
\fB-I\fP options, but is blank on many systems).
.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.rs
.sp
\fBpcre2(3)\fP
.
.
.SH AUTHOR
.rs
.sp
This manual page was originally written by Mark Baker for the Debian GNU/Linux
system. It has been subsequently revised as a generic PCRE2 man page.
.
.
.SH REVISION
.rs
.sp
.nf
Last updated: 28 September 2014
.fi
